content/guides/backblaze/index.md, before:

---
title : "Replicating to Backblaze B2"
date: 2021-02-27T00:00:00Z
layout: docs
menu:
  docs:
    parent: "replica-guides"
weight: 420
---

This guide will show you how to use [Backblaze B2](https://www.backblaze.com/cloud-storage) as a database replica path for
Litestream.

## Create a bucket

To begin, you'll need a bucket to store your data. If you don't already have one
set up in Backblaze, follow the steps below:

1. From your Backblaze dashboard, go to _My Account > Buckets_
1. Click _"Create a Bucket"_
1. Enter a unique name for _"Bucket Unique Name"_ and leave the remaining fields as their defaults.
1. Click _"Create a Bucket"_
1. Copy the bucket details to the appropriate places in your `litestream.yml` file:

You may want to change _Lifecycle Settings_ to _"Keep only the last version of
the file"_ as Litestream files are immutable and don't require versioning.

![Screenshot of bucket settings in Backblaze B2](bucket.png)

```yaml
dbs:
  - path: path-to-your-local-db-file
    replica:
      type: s3
      bucket: your-bucket-name
      path: db # change to whatever path you want
      endpoint: s3.us-west-000.backblazeb2.com # change this
      force-path-style: true
```

## Create a user

Next, create a user with programmatic access to the bucket you just created.

1. From your Backblaze dashboard, go to _My Account > App Keys_
1. Click _"Add Application Key"_
1. In _"Name of Key"_, enter any unique name
1. Under _"Allow access to Bucket(s)"_ select the bucket you created above.
1. Leave the remaining fields as their defaults.
1. Click _"Create new key"_
1. Copy the credentials to the appropriate places in your `litestream.yml` file
    * The `keyID` field is your `access-key-id`
    * The `applicationKey` field is your `secret-access-key`

![Screenshot of user keys settings in Backblaze](user-keys.png)

```yaml
access-key-id: your-backblaze-keyID
secret-access-key: your-backblaze-applicationKey
```

## Configuration file

Your final `litestream.yml` configuration file should look like this:

```yaml
access-key-id: your-backblaze-keyID
secret-access-key: your-backblaze-applicationKey

dbs:
  - path: path-to-your-local-db-file
    replica:
      type: s3
      bucket: your-bucket-name
      path: db # change to whatever path you want
      endpoint: s3.us-west-000.backblazeb2.com # change this
      force-path-style: true
```


## See Also

- [S3-Compatible Services](/guides/s3-compatible) - Other S3-compatible providers
- [Troubleshooting](/docs/troubleshooting) - Common issues and solutions
- [Configuration Reference](/reference/config) - Complete configuration options

Commit message:

docs(s3): document provider auto-detection for S3-compatible services
Add documentation for the automatic provider detection feature introduced
in Litestream v0.5.0 (benbjohnson/litestream#899). Litestream now automatically
configures settings like force-path-style and sign-payload based on the
endpoint URL.

Updates:
- Add new 'Automatic Provider Detection' section to s3-compatible guide
- Update provider compatibility matrix with auto-detection column
- Update Backblaze B2 notes in s3-compatible guide
- Add callout to Backblaze guide noting auto-detection

Closes #197

content/guides/backblaze/index.md, after:

---
title : "Replicating to Backblaze B2"
date: 2021-02-27T00:00:00Z
layout: docs
menu:
  docs:
    parent: "replica-guides"
weight: 420
---

This guide will show you how to use [Backblaze B2](https://www.backblaze.com/cloud-storage) as a database replica path for
Litestream.

## Create a bucket

To begin, you'll need a bucket to store your data. If you don't already have one
set up in Backblaze, follow the steps below:

1. From your Backblaze dashboard, go to _My Account > Buckets_
1. Click _"Create a Bucket"_
1. Enter a unique name for _"Bucket Unique Name"_ and leave the remaining fields as their defaults.
1. Click _"Create a Bucket"_
1. Copy the bucket details to the appropriate places in your `litestream.yml` file:

You may want to change _Lifecycle Settings_ to _"Keep only the last version of
the file"_ as Litestream files are immutable and don't require versioning.

![Screenshot of bucket settings in Backblaze B2](bucket.png)

```yaml
dbs:
  - path: path-to-your-local-db-file
    replica:
      type: s3
      bucket: your-bucket-name
      path: db # change to whatever path you want
      endpoint: s3.us-west-000.backblazeb2.com # change this
      force-path-style: true
```

{{< alert icon="💡" text="<strong>Litestream v0.5.0+</strong> automatically detects Backblaze B2 endpoints and configures <code>force-path-style</code> and <code>sign-payload</code> settings. You can omit <code>force-path-style: true</code> from your configuration when using v0.5.0 or later." >}}

## Create a user

Next, create a user with programmatic access to the bucket you just created.

1. From your Backblaze dashboard, go to _My Account > App Keys_
1. Click _"Add Application Key"_
1. In _"Name of Key"_, enter any unique name
1. Under _"Allow access to Bucket(s)"_ select the bucket you created above.
1. Leave the remaining fields as their defaults.
1. Click _"Create new key"_
1. Copy the credentials to the appropriate places in your `litestream.yml` file
    * The `keyID` field is your `access-key-id`
    * The `applicationKey` field is your `secret-access-key`

![Screenshot of user keys settings in Backblaze](user-keys.png)

```yaml
access-key-id: your-backblaze-keyID
secret-access-key: your-backblaze-applicationKey
```

## Configuration file

Your final `litestream.yml` configuration file should look like this:

```yaml
access-key-id: your-backblaze-keyID
secret-access-key: your-backblaze-applicationKey

dbs:
  - path: path-to-your-local-db-file
    replica:
      type: s3
      bucket: your-bucket-name
      path: db # change to whatever path you want
      endpoint: s3.us-west-000.backblazeb2.com # change this
      force-path-style: true
```


## See Also

- [S3-Compatible Services](/guides/s3-compatible) - Other S3-compatible providers
- [Troubleshooting](/docs/troubleshooting) - Common issues and solutions
- [Configuration Reference](/reference/config) - Complete configuration options
